Add HIP Performance Guidelines (#3455)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/reference/performance_guidelines.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter describes a set of best practices designed to help
   developers optimize the performance of HIP-capable GPU architectures.
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, CUDA, performance, guidelines

*******************************************************************************
Performance Guidelines
*******************************************************************************

The AMD HIP Performance Guidelines are a set of best practices designed to help

> developers optimize the performance of AMD GPUs. They cover established

Reviewer: ```suggestion
developers optimize the performance of their code for AMD GPUs. They cover established
```
These guidelines don't magically make GPUs perform better, but the code that is executed on them :)

Author: Updated

> parallelization and optimization techniques, coding metaphors, and idioms that

Reviewer: What is a coding metaphor? Are they really covered in here?

Author: Perhaps no. I removed from the document.

> can greatly simplify programming for HIP-capable GPU architectures.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say these techniques are for simplifying code, but for improving performance. At least that should be the goal of this document

Author: Fixed.

By following four main cornerstones, we can exploit the performance
optimization potential of HIP.

- parallel execution

> - memory usage optimization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- memory bandwidth (usage) optimization
```
Reducing memory usage/footprint itself does not necessarily optimize the performance, but optimizing the bandwidth (usage) can

Author: Yes, I was thinking about it. Thanks! Updated.

> - optimization for maximum throughput

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- optimizing for maximum instruction throughput
```

- minimizing memory thrashing

In the following chapters, we will show you their benefits and how to use them
effectively.

.. _parallel execution:
Parallel execution
===============================================================================
For optimal use, the application should reveal and efficiently imply as much

> parallelism as possible to keep all system components active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For optimal use, the application should reveal and efficiently employ/provide as much
parallelism as possible to keep all system components busy.
```
"imply" doesn't really make sense here. Keeping the components "busy" also is more direct than "active"

Author: Fixed.

Application level
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The application should optimize parallel execution across the host and devices
using asynchronous calls and streams. Workloads should be assigned based on
efficiency: serial to the host, parallel to the devices.

For parallel workloads, when threads need to synchronize to share data, if they
belong to the same block, they should use ``__syncthreads()`` (see:

> :ref:`synchronization functions`) within the same kernel invocation. If they

Reviewer: This is not a recommendation ("should"), but a must. Also, this does not really belong to the performance guidelines, this is about correctness.

belong to different blocks, they must use global memory with two separate
kernel invocations. The latter should be minimized as it adds overhead.

Device level
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Device-level optimization primarily involves maximizing parallel execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Device level optimization primarily involves maximizing parallel execution
```

Author: Fixed

across the multiprocessors of the device. This can be achieved by executing
multiple kernels concurrently on a device. The management of these kernels is
facilitated by streams, which allow for the overlapping of computation and data
transfers, enhancing performance. The aim is to keep all multiprocessors busy
by executing enough kernels concurrently. However, launching too many kernels
can lead to resource contention, so a balance must be found for optimal
performance. This approach helps in achieving maximum utilization of the

> resources of the device.

Reviewer: This is not only achievable by running multiple kernels. The first pitfall for using GPUs and not getting the proper performance, is not having a big enough parallel workload in general. One kernel with a big enough grid can also fully occupy a gpu.

Multiprocessor level
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Multiprocessor-level optimization involves maximizing parallel execution within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiprocessor level
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiprocessor level optimization involves maximizing parallel execution within
```
Either use the dash also in the heading or in none of the two, same goes for "device-level" in the previous section

Author: Fixed.

each multiprocessor on a device. Each multiprocessor can execute a number of
threads concurrently, and the total number of threads that can run in parallel
is determined by the number of concurrent threads each multiprocessor can

> handle.

Reviewer: This is almost a tautology. Did you mean
```suggestion
each multiprocessor on a device. Each multiprocessor can execute a number of
threads concurrently, and the total number of threads that can run in parallel on a gpu
is determined by the number of concurrent threads each multiprocessor can
handle.
```
?
If yes, than that rather belongs to the device level optimization. If you mean occupancy, then you should rewrite this a bit

Author: Removed. I think it is not necessary.

The key to multiprocessor-level optimization is to efficiently utilize the
various functional units within a multiprocessor. This can be achieved by
ensuring a sufficient number of resident warps, as at every instruction issue

> time, a warp scheduler selects an instruction that is ready to execute. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various functional units within a multiprocessor. This can be achieved by
ensuring a sufficient number of resident warps, so that every clock cycle an instruction from a warp is ready for execution. This
```
Also: full occupancy is not a guarantee for peak performance, so "This can be achieved by" is not enitrely accurate

Author: Updated.

instruction can be another independent instruction of the same warp, exploiting

> :ref:`instruction optimization<instruction-level parallelism>`, or more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`instruction level parallelism<instruction-level parallelism>`, or more
```
this link is not working right now

Also: This is not necessarily called instruction level parallelism, that depends on the hardware implementation. But I think this is nitpicking, as it goes into too much detail

Author: Updated

commonly an instruction of another warp, exploiting thread-level parallelism.

In comparison, device-level optimization focuses on the device as a whole,

> aiming to keep all multiprocessors busy by executing enough kernels

Reviewer: Again, this is not only achievable by executing enough kernels in parallel

concurrently. Both levels of optimization are crucial for achieving maximum
performance. They work together to ensure efficient utilization of the
resources of the GPU, from the individual multiprocessors to the device as a
whole.

.. _memory optimization:

> Memory optimization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memory throughput/bandwidth optimization
```
choose one. Memory optimization itself is too broad of a term when it comes to performance

Author: Fixed

===============================================================================
The first step in maximizing memory throughput is to minimize low-bandwidth
data transfers. This involves reducing data transfers between the host and the
device, as these have lower bandwidth than transfers between global memory and

> the device.

Reviewer: I agree with @Melirius, this is written in a confusing way. I'd just ommit the second sentence and integrate it into the first.
```suggestion
data transfers between the host and the device.
```

Author: Updated.

> Additionally, data transfers between global memory and the device should be

Reviewer: Same as @Melirius - "device" is not the proper term to use here.
Maybe rephrase to
```suggestion
Additionally, loads from and stores to global memory should be
```

minimized by maximizing the use of on-chip memory: shared memory and caches.
Shared memory acts as a user-managed cache, where the application explicitly
allocates and accesses it. A common programming pattern is to stage data from
device memory into shared memory. This involves each thread of a block loading
data from device memory to shared memory, synchronizing with all other threads

> of the block, processing the data in shared memory, synchronizing again if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the block, processing the data which is stored in shared memory, synchronizing again if
```
Otherwise this sounds like in-memory computing, which it defintely is not

Author: true. fixed.

necessary, and writing the results back to device global memory.

For some applications, a traditional hardware-managed cache is more appropriate
to exploit data locality. On devices of certain compute capabilities, the same
on-chip memory is used for both L1 and shared memory, and the amount dedicated

> to each is configurable for each kernel call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to exploit data locality.
```
This is not true for AMD GPUs, and "compute capability" is not a valid term for AMD GPUs.

Reviewer 2: Do not forget, HIP is also positioned as a tool for NVIDIA GPUs - "one-code-fits-all".

Reviewer: That is true, but in that case it would be better to point to the cuda documentation, and not copy it here. Apart from being questionable when it comes to the license, it also increases the burden on keeping the documentation up to date.

Author: Thanks! Updated.

Finally, the throughput of memory accesses by a kernel can vary significantly

> depending on the access pattern for each type of memory. Therefore, the next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the throughput of memory accesses by a kernel can vary significantly
depending on the access pattern. Therefore, the next
```

Author: Updated

step in maximizing memory throughput is to organize memory accesses as
optimally as possible. This is especially important for global memory accesses,
as global memory bandwidth is low compared to available on-chip bandwidths and
arithmetic instruction throughput. Thus, non-optimal global memory accesses
generally have a high impact on performance.

Data Transfer
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Applications should aim to minimize data transfers between the host and the
device. This can be achieved by moving more computations from the host to the
device, even if it means running kernels that do not fully utilize the
parallelism for device. Intermediate data structures can be created, used,
and discarded in device memory without being mapped or copied to host memory.

Batching small transfers into a single large transfer can improve performance
due to the overhead associated with each transfer. On systems with a front-side

> bus, using page-locked host memory can enhance data transfer performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to the overhead associated with each transfer.
```
This sentence really dates the documentation. I don't think there's any system out there with an FSB that is supported by ROCm (e.g. providing PCIe 3.0)

throughput. Therefore, understanding how memory addresses map to banks and
scheduling requests to minimize conflicts is crucial for optimal performance.

Constant memory is in device memory and cached in the constant cache. Requests
are split based on different memory addresses, affecting throughput, and are
serviced at the throughput of the constant cache for cache hits, or the
throughput of the device memory otherwise.

Texture and surface memory are stored in device memory and cached in texture
cache. This setup optimizes 2D spatial locality, leading to better performance
for threads reading close 2D addresses. Reading device memory through texture
or surface fetching can be advantageous, offering higher bandwidth for local
texture fetches or surface reads, offloading addressing calculations,
allowing data broadcasting, and optional conversion of 8-bit and 16-bit integer
input data to 32-bit floating-point values on-the-fly.

.. _instruction optimization:
Optimization for maximum instruction throughput
===============================================================================
To maximize instruction throughput:

- minimize low throughput arithmetic instructions

> - minimize divergent warps inflicted by control flow instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- minimize divergence within warps inflicted by control flow instructions
```
just to emphasize, that different warps may take different execution paths, but the important part is all threads within a warp taking the same path

Reviewer 2: HIP compiler usually does not emit commands for fast-skip. Or now already does?

Reviewer: Good question. Not sure about that. But it should still be emphasized, that divergence is only a problem when the threads within a warp diverge. If different warps take different code paths no damage is done (from the instruction-throughput point of view)

> - minimize the number of instruction as possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- minimize the amount of instructions as much as possible
```
or even:
```suggestion
```
Also: this is kind of a weird performance optimization. Obviously one shouldn't do unnecessary work, but reducing the amount of instructions in general seems like a weird suggestion. This sounds more like an optimization on an algorithmical level, but not specific to GPUs

Author: removed

- maximize instruction parallelism

Arithmetic instructions
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The type and complexity of arithmetic operations can significantly impact the
performance of your application. We are highlighting some hints how to maximize
it.

Using efficient operations: Some arithmetic operations are more costly than
others. For example, multiplication is typically faster than division, and
integer operations are usually faster than floating-point operations,

> especially with double-precision.

Reviewer: "faster" is kind of a broad term here. When it comes to throughput, floating-point and integer operations are mostly on par, and some architectures even have higher single-precision throughput than integer throughput. Especially when it comes to 64 bit integer operations, as these have to be emulated. I'm not sure about latency though right now.

Reviewer 2: Heh, you're right. That is the timings for GCN architecture: https://github.com/CLRX/CLRX-mirror/blob/master/doc/GcnTimings.md Float is even faster than integer.

Minimizing low-throughput instructions: This might involve trading precision
for speed when it does not affect the final result. For instance, consider

> using single-precision arithmetic instead of double-precision.

Reviewer: I'm torn on these suggestions in the performance guidelines. The specific case ("when it does not affect the final result") is kind of a weird one. In general moving from double to single precision changes the outcome of the result.

This is an optimization that does not necessarily get you closer to peak performance of the device, but improves performance by doing less/different work

Leverage intrinsic functions: Intrinsic functions are pre-defined functions
available in HIP that can often be executed faster than equivalent arithmetic
operations (subject to some input or accuracy restrictions). They can help
optimize performance by replacing more complex arithmetic operations.

Avoiding divergent warps: Divergent warps occur when threads within the same
warp follow different execution paths. This can happen due to conditional
statements that lead to different arithmetic operations being performed by
different threads. Divergent warps can significantly reduce instruction

> throughput, so try to structure your code to minimize divergence.

Reviewer: I would argue that divergent warps don't reduce the instruction throughput, but the utilization of the ALUs/SIMDs. In theory you can still issue as many warp-level instructions as before - achieving the same throughput - but in the worst case only one thread actually executes the instruction

This paragraph probably fits better into the "Control flow instructions" section

Author: Moved

Optimizing memory access: The efficiency of memory access can impact the speed
of arithmetic operations. Coalesced memory access, where threads in a warp
access consecutive memory locations, can improve memory throughput and thus

> the speed of arithmetic operations.

Reviewer: Pedantic: arithmetic operations can't be "sped up", the time they can't be scheduled for execution however can depend on memory accesses. I would add a reference to the memory optimizations here

Author: Added

Maximizing instruction parallelism: Some GPU architectures could issue parallel

> independent instructions simultaneously, for example integer and floating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maximizing instruction parallelism: Some GPU architectures could issue 
independent instructions simultaneously, for example integer and floating
```

Also: some AMD architectures have support for "packed math", adding the ability to execute e.g. two 16-bit floating-point instructions at once
https://gpuopen.com/learn/rdna-performance-guide/#bit-math

Author: Removed (see Ivan's comment)

point, or two operations with independent inputs and outputs. Mostly this is a
work for compiler, but expressing parallelism in the code explicitly can

> improve instructions throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
point, or two operations with independent inputs and outputs. This is mostly
done by the compiler, but expressing parallelism in the code explicitly can
improve instructions throughput.
```

Author: Updated

Control flow instructions
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Flow control instructions (``if``, ``else``, ``for``, ``do``, ``while``,
``break``, ``continue``, ``switch``) can impact instruction throughput by
causing threads within a warp to diverge and follow different execution paths.
To optimize performance, control conditions should be written to minimize
divergent warps. For example, when the control condition depends on
(``threadIdx`` / ``warpSize``), no warp diverges. The compiler may optimize
loops or short if or switch blocks using branch predication, preventing warp
divergence. With branch predication, instructions associated with a false
predicate are scheduled but not executed, avoiding unnecessary operations.

Synchronization
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Synchronization ensures that all threads within a block have completed their

> computations and memory accesses before moving forward, which is critical when
> threads are dependent on the results of other threads. However,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
computations and memory accesses before moving forward, which is critical when
threads depend on the results of other threads. However,
```

Author: Fixed
